# Task grader
This simple tool manages every step of grading a contest task, from the generation of test data to the grading of a solution output.

## Installing

Install dependencies: on Debian/stable:

    apt install build-essential sharutils python2.7 fp-compiler gcj-4.9 cgroup-tools

you also need to have a binary called `gcj` (not provided by Debian/stable):

    ln -s /usr/bin/gcj-4.9 /usr/bin/gcj

Execute `install.sh` in the taskgrader directory to install. It will help you install everything. If needed, modify `config.py` to suit your needs.

## Testing

After configuration, you can test that the taskgrader is configured properly and is behaving as expected by running `tests/test.py`. By default, it will run all tests and give you a summary.

Full usage instructions are given by `test.py -h`.

## Executing

The taskgrader itself can be executed with

    python taskgrader.py

It will wait for an input JSON on its standard input, then proceed to evaluation and then output the result JSON on standard output. Read `schema_input.json` and `schema_output.json` for a description of the expected formats.

You can also use the grading tool, executed with

    python grade.py [option]... FILE...

Full usage instructions are given by `grade.py -h`.

## How does it work?

Here's a description of the evaluation process, managed by the function `evaluation(evaluationParams)`.

* `evaluationParams` is the input JSON
* A build folder is created for the evaluation
* The `defaultParams.json` file from the task is read and its variables added
* A `dictWithVars` is created to add the variables, and returns the JSON data as if variables were replaced by their values
* `generators` are compiled
* `generations` describe how `generators` are to be executed in order to generate all the test files and optional libraries
* `extraTests` are added into the tests pool
* The `sanitizer` and the `checker` are compiled
* The `solutions` are compiled
* All `executions` are done for the solutions
* The full evaluation report is returned on standard output

### Executions

Each execution is the grading of one solution against multiple test files. For each `execution`:
* Test files corresponding to `filterTests` are selected, then for each test file:
* It passes first the `sanitizer` test
* Then the solution is executed, with the test file as standard input and the output saved
* Finally the `checker` grades the solution according to its output on that particular test file

`filterTests` is a list of globs (as `"test*.in"` or `"mytest.in"`) selecting test files to use among all the test files generated by the generators, and the `extraTests` given. One can specify directly test files into this array to use only specific ones.

## Evaluation components

The evaluation is made against a task which has multiple components.

### Generators

The `generators` are generating the testing environment. They are executed, optionally with various parameters, to generate files, which can be:

* test files: inputs for the solution, and if necessary, expected results
* libraries, for the compilation and execution of solutions

Some of these files can be passed directly in the evaluation JSON, without the need of a generator.

### Sanitizer

The `sanitizer` checks whether a test input is valid. It expects the test input on its stdin, and its exit code indicates the validity of the data.

### Checker

The `checker` checks whether the output of a solution corresponds to the expected result. It expects three arguments on the command line:

* `test.solout` the solution output
* `test.in` the reference input
* `test.out` the reference output

All checkers are passed these three arguments, whether they use it or not. The checker outputs the grading of the solution; its exit code can indicate an error while checking (invalid arguments, missing files, ...).

## Tools

Various tools are available in the subfolder `tools`. They can be configured with their respective `config.py` files.

### Creating a task

`taskstarter.py` helps task writers create and modify simple tasks. This simple tool is meant as a starting point for people not knowing how the taskgrader works but willing to write a task, and helps them through documented steps. It allows to do some operations in tasks folders, such as creating the base skeleton, giving some help on various components and testing the task. This tool creates a `taskSettings.json` in the task folder, that `genJson.py` can then use to create a `defaultParams.json` accordingly.

### Preparing a task for grading

`genJson.py` analyses tasks and creates the `defaultParams.json` file for them. It will read the `taskSettings.json` file in each task for some settings and try to automatically detect other settings.

#### taskSettings.json

The `taskSettings.json` is JSON data giving some parameters about the task, for use by `genJson.py`. It has the following keys:

* `generator`: path to the generator of the task
* `generatorDeps`: dependencies for the generator (list of fileDescr, see the input JSON schema for more information)
* `sanitizer` and `sanitizerDeps`: sanitizer of the task (path and dependencies)
* `checker` and `checkerDeps`: checker of the task (path and dependencies)
* `extraDir`: folder with extra files (input test files and/or libraries)
* `overrideParams`: JSON data to be copied directly into `defaultParams.json`, will replace any key with the same name from `genJson.py` generated JSON data
* `correctSolutions`: list of solutions known as working with the task, will be tested by `genJson.py` which will check whether they get the right results. Each solution must have the following keys: `path`, `lang` and `grade` (the numerical grade the solution is supposed to get).

#### defaultParams.json

The `defaultParams.json` is a task file giving some information about the task, must be JSON data pairing the following keys with the right objects:

* `rootPath`: the root path of the files
* `defaultGenerator`: a default generator
* `defaultGeneration`: the default generation for the default generator
* `extraTests` (optional): some extra tests
* `defaultSanitizer`: the default sanitizer
* `defaultChecker`: the default checker
* `defaultDependencies-[language]` (optional): default dependencies for that language; if not defined, it will fallback to `defaultDependencies` or to an empty list
* `defaultFilterTests-[language]` (optional): default glob-style filters for the tests for that language; if not defined, it will fallback to `defaultFilterTests` or to an empty list

### Grading a solution

`stdGrade.sh` allows to easily grade a solution. The task path must be the current directory, or must be specified with `-p`. It will expect to have a `defaultParams.json` file in the task directory, describing the task with some variables. Note that it's meant for fast and simple grading of solutions, it doesn't give a full control over the evaluation process. `stdGrade.sh` is a shortcut to two utilities present in its folder, for more options, see `genStdTaskJson.py -h`.

Basic usage: `stdGrade.sh [SOLUTION]...` from a task folder.

## Internal workings (for developers)

`evaluation` is the evaluation process. It reads an input JSON and preprocesses it to replace the variables.

Each program is defined as an instance of the class Program, that we `compile`, then `prepareExecution` to set the execution parameters, then `execute` with the proper parameters.

Languages are set as classes which define two functions: `getSource` which defines how to search for some dependencies for this language, and `compile` which is the compilation process.

The cache is handled by various Cache classes, each storing the cache parameters for a specific program and giving access to the various cache folders corresponding to compilation or execution of said programs.
